The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Encyclopedia of Food Security and Sustainability
Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Volume 1: General and Global Situation
On September 2015 the United Nations Summit on Sustainable Development in New York established the global agenda for sustainable development until 2030 and defined a list of objectives on which to focus commitments for the next fifteen years. These objectives have been defined Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 17 SDGs replace, and broaden, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expiring in 2015. Agricultural production and human health have been among the mainstay sectors at the SDGs. The SDGs acknowledge that developed countries have neither the capacity nor the right to direct the development policies on behalf of the developing countries, but decisions must necessarily searched by the involvement of interested countries and allocating on these priorities worldwide participation policies.
Encyclopedia of Food Security and Sustainability
ancestry articleinfo articletitlenorm authfirstinitialnorm authfirstsurnamenorm cid cids confeditor contentsubtype contenttype copyright dateloaded dateloadedtxt datesearch datesort dateupdated dco docsubtype doctype doi eid ewtransactionid hubeid indexeddate isbn isbns isbnnorm isbnsnorm itemstage itemtransactionid itemweight mostrecentdate openaccess openarchive pg pgfirst pglast pii piinorm pubdateend pubdatestart pubdatetxt pubyr readinglevel satsrcinfo satsrctitles smartlinks sortorder srctitle srctitlenorm srctype ssids alllist content subheadings tomb vol volissue webpdf webpdfpagecount yearnav affil articletitle auth authfirstini authfull authkeywords authlast primabst ref body
Encyclopedia of Food Security and Sustainability
University of Naples ‘Federico II’, Portici, Italy
University of Naples ‘Federico II’
Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel
Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School
University of New England, Armidale, NSW, Australia
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA
Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations
The Roadmap to Future World
Reference Module in Food Science
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
University of Naples Federico II
On September 2015 the United Nations Summit on Sustainable Development in New York established the global agenda for sustainable development until 2030 and defined a list of objectives on which to focus commitments for the next fifteen years. These objectives have been defined Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 17 SDGs replace, and broaden, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expiring in 2015. Agricultural production and human health have been among the mainstay sectors at the SDGs. The SDGs acknowledge that developed countries have neither the capacity nor the right to direct the development policies on behalf of the developing countries, but decisions must necessarily searched by the involvement of interested countries and allocating on these priorities worldwide participation policies.
On September 2015 the United Nations Summit on Sustainable Development in New York established the global agenda for sustainable development until 2030 and defined a list of objectives on which to focus commitments for the next fifteen years. These objectives have been defined Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs replace the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expiring in 2015. About 1 billion people still live under the threshold for poverty set by the World Bank, and almost the same number do not have enough food for themselves. The SDGs acknowledge that developed countries have neither the ability nor the right to direct the development policies on behalf of the developing countries, but these decisions and solutions must necessarily be shared by the greatest number of the political entities.
Around 22 millions years ago, a monkey abandoned the relative safety of the trees of the tropical forest in East Africa to start an amazing adventure crossing the millennia. Seizing the new opportunities of nourishment offered by the savanna and learning to survive the threats to life, in a process extremely rapid in evolutionary terms, this monkey went forward our biped ancestors. From first appearance, its primary goal was securing food to its community and its descendants. For most of the following ages, its diet of consisted only of grasses, of fruits collected from prairie trees and of small animals hunted, and of insects. Things changed 200.000 years ago, with the coming of
Most importantly, the tremendous advances in science and technology gathered in the last century have been unbalanced by the accurate evaluation of the impact of the human activity on nature, environment and the human society itself. As a consequence, the delicate balance between human progress and exhausting of world resources appears today to be broken. One of the sectors where these outcomes are more dramatically apparent is the food production system, which is currently experiencing increasing pressure both on the demand side (from growing population and consumer demands) and on the supply side (from greater competition for inputs and from climate change). Despite the commendable but isolated efforts, announcements and even signed agreements of governments, international organizations and agencies, effective and coordinated initiatives aimed at improving food sustainability and security remained at an early stage until now.
The Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations
On September 2015 the United Nations Summit on Sustainable Development in New York established the 2030 global agenda for sustainable development and defined a new list of objectives on which to focus commitments for the next fifteen years. The SDGs, in their aim replace and broaden the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expiring last year with a less than satisfactory balance: about 1 billion people still live under the threshold for poverty set by the World Bank, and almost the same number do not have enough food for themselves. In 2012 it was already indubitable that the MDGs would not be achieved. Therefore, during the Conference of Rio in 2013, it was decided to launch the UN Open Group, which last year unveiled the new master plan development for the planet. Unlike the MDGs, which were produced by a handful of experts of the UN, to define the SDGs, UN launched the largest consultation program of its history to probe the most largely accepted opinion on what the SDGs were to include. The biggest difference is that while the MDGs were considered development goals for the least developed countries, to be achieved thanks to the efforts of the “wealthiest” Member States, this time, each country is expected to work to comply with it.
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) expressed by the Summit - with 169 related targets - are the result of a work of public consultation and multi-stakeholder involvement lasted two years. The vision placed into them is that of a world inclusive, equitable and ecologically friendly. Thus, the SDGs intend to represent a new set of goals, targets and indicators that
The SDGs are an important vision, and may eventually assist to move the world to a sustainable path (
The first steps in this direction (
Those above are also the topic the substantiate the Section on Food Sustainability, Security and Effects of Global Change (
Man, like at his beginning as a species, is approaching a new turning point in his long way to keep on existence. As indicated by SDGs, food sustainability and security are the milestones of this path, in addressing the topical issues of, for example, the impact of climate change on food resources, biodiversity and global food security. Solving these challenges will not be easy and will rely on integration of political actions and advance of knowledge from different disciplines in order to strengthen the capacity to generate and share research data, not only within the scientific community but also within the industrial world and society in general. The development, optimization, validation and application of novel technologies for food production and manufacture are a fine example and will be critical in securing nutrition to the whole mankind in a sustainable way.
The SDGs shows that developed countries have neither the ability nor the right to direct the development policies on behalf of the developing ones, but these decisions and solutions must necessarily be shared by the greatest number of the political subjects. A potential ‘game-changer’ in the scenario is the rising economic power of China and India. Both these countries are considered developing nations, but they're increasingly influencing global food trade and policy, not the least of which because they house a large proportion of the world's population (
The Roadmap to Future World
The tools available to the smart monkey today are much more advanced than in the past, but also more sharp and dangerous, even without thinking to war weapons. Today, we have the ability to change dramatically, for the better or worse, the environment and the ecosystems in which we live. Limiting ourselves to nutrition, it is now clear for example that our current consumption of animal meat is not sustainable from the energy and environmental viewpoint. Novel technologies offer now the opportunity to replace meat (however I hope we will still enjoy a succulent steak from time to time to time) with other protein sources such as new legumes resilient to drought and salinity stress or to climatic change. Another promising source is – can you believe? – from insects, almost closing a circle in the human diet habits tracing back to far ages. Other options are based on organic farming with lower environmental impact. All these opportunities are of course in line with the objectives of the 17 SDGs. However they are also introducing new challenges, for instance from the nutritional point of view: will the new legumes be as much productive as sustainable? Will insect proteins in the diet be a source a novel and unknown food allergens? The road to food security and sustainability is still long and windy, but the direction appear to be traced.
Goals in nutrition science 2015–2020
Greenhouse gas mitigation by agricultural intensification
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
The Developing World Is Poorer than We Thought,but No Less Successful in the Fight against Poverty. Policy Research Working Paper 4703
Global state of biodiversity and loss
Food sustainability, security, and effects of global change
Reference Module in Food Science
From Millennium development goals to sustainable development goals
