https://api.elsevier.com/content/article/pii/B9780128243428000183 doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 3-s2.0-B9780128243428000183 10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 1 Evolution of the concept of sustainability. From Brundtland Report to sustainable development goals  Sustainable Resource Management EBook chp 9780128243428 1 24 1-24 urn:isbn:978-0-12-824342-8 text/plain 2021-12-31 2021 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Elsevier Inc. Hajian, Mohammadhadi Jangchi Kashani, Somayeh 
               The definition of sustainability has always been discussed by experts. In 1972, definitions stressed restrictions on ecological systems, carrying out functions such as absorption and recycling of waste of anthropogenic activities, with the concomitant problems of improving social, educational, health, and employment. In 1987, sustainable development was defined as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” In 2019, it was defined as satisfying the needs of current and future generations, depending on appropriate circumstances of human, natural, and economic capital to provide for human welfare.
               The concept of sustainable development has become a widely recognized goal for human society in the 21st century. The idea of sustainable development came to light in 1987 with the publication of “Our Common Future,” which firmly established sustainable development as a critical component of international development. Because inequalities that had been anomalies were increasing within and among nations, increasing poverty, especially in developing countries, depleting the ozone layer and causing global warming, depleting natural resources and endangering some species of animals and plants, and causing water and air pollution, and so forth, sustainable development came about as an effort to change the way of thinking about the planet. Behind this lies the reason for why the concept of development is now preferred instead of growth. Growth is believed to reflect only a quantitative aspect of countries without considering other qualitative items such as education, health, and equality. The argument is that growth is a quantitative increase in physical scale whereas development is qualitative improvement or the unfolding of potentialities. This research analyzes why and how the concept of sustainable development has emerged, how it should be conceptualized, and what should be done to achieve it.
               In addition, the idea of sustainable development was first thought to be a strategy to against ecological disaster resulting from the extreme commercial exploitation of sources and the deterioration of the environment. The main awareness was to maintain an exceptional environment. Today the idea has been extended. It is has first-rate economic and social complexity. The evaluation of financial techniques in many countries has proven that fast financial growth precipitated critical issues from the viewpoint of sustainable development consisting of social, economic and environmental sustainability.
             0 false  false    Economic sustainability Environmental sustainability Social sustainability Sustainable development Sustainable development goals    85114033927 2-s2.0-85114033927  nonserial BK 780031 291210 291767 35  Sustainable Resource Management Modern Approaches and Contexts SUSTAINABLERESOURCEMANAGEMENT 2021-06-19 2021-06-25 2021-06-19 2021-06-25 2021-06-19T17:10:41 3-s2.0-B9780128243428000183 B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 B9780128243428000183 10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 S300 S300.1 FULL-TEXT 3-s2.0-C20200016555 10.1016/C2020-0-01655-5 2022-12-12T15:50:33.919364Z 0 0 20210101 20211231 2021 2021-06-19T17:15:28.135278Z articleinfo articletitlenorm authfirstinitialnorm authfirstsurnamenorm cid cids confeditor contenttype copyright dateloaded dateloadedtxt datesearch datesort dateupdated dco docsubtype doctype doi eid ewtransactionid hubeid indexeddate isbn isbns isbnnorm isbnsnorm itemstage itemtransactionid itemweight openaccess openarchive pg pgfirst pglast pii piinorm pubdateend pubdatestart pubdatetxt pubyr sortorder srctitle srctitlenorm srctype ssids content subj subheadings tomb webpdf webpdfpagecount yearnav affil articletitle auth authfirstini authfull authkeywords authlast primabst ref body 978-0-12-824342-8 9780128243428 978-0-12-824343-5 9780128243435  Sustainable Resource Management 7 1 24 1 24  2021 2021-01-01 2021-12-31 2021 Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain  Department of Chemistry and Environmental Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, University Heights, Newark, NJ, United States Department of Chemistry and Environmental Science New Jersey Institute of Technology University Heights Newark NJ United States     Juan F. Velasco-Muñoz  Department of Economy and Business, Research Centre CIAIMBITAL, University of Almería, Almería, Spain Department of Economy and Business Research Centre CIAIMBITAL University of Almería Almería Spain       chapter chp Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. EVOLUTIONCONCEPTSUSTAINABILITYBRUNDTLANDREPORTSUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENTGOALS HAJIAN M 1 Introduction  2 The concept of sustainable development  3 The definition of sustainable development  4 The trend of sustainable development  5 The evolution of sustainable development concept  6 Indicator development  7 Environmental sustainability 7.1 Social sustainability  7.2 Economic sustainable development  7.3 Context of sustainable development goals  7.4 Key Millennium Development Goal achievements   8 Sustainable development goals 8.1 Goal 1. End poverty everywhere in all of its forms  8.2 Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture  8.3 Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote welfare for all people  8.4 Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all  8.5 Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls  8.6 Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all  8.7 Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all  8.8 Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all  8.9 Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation  8.10 Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries  8.11 Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable  8.12 Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns  8.13 Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts  8.14 Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development  8.15 Goal 15. Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation, and halt biodiversity loss  8.16 Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels  8.17 Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 8.17.1 Finance  8.17.2 Technology  8.17.3 Capacity-building  8.17.4 Trade  8.17.5 Systemic issues   8.18 Sustainable development goals and targets 2030   9 Conclusions  References  Further reading   AYRES 2001 155 168 R  ATKINSON 2003 T SOCIALINDICATORSEUSOCIALINCLUSION  ATKISSON 2006 231 243 A FUTURESUSTAINABILITY SUSTAINABILITYDEADLONGLIVESUSTAINABILITY  BARR 2008 S ENVIRONMENTSOCIETYSUSTAINABILITYASHGATEPOLICYCITIZEN  COSTANZA 1987 407 412 R  CHAUDHERY 2019 M MODERNENVIRONMENTALANALYSISTECHNIQUESFORPOLLUTANTS  DAVIES 2013 111 124 G  GOODLAND 1995 1 24 R  GOODLAND 1996 1002 1017 R  HEDIGER 2006 359 394 W  KORI 2012 E 2NDINTERNATIONALCONFERENCEENVIRONMENTBIOSCIENCEIPCBEE ENVIRONMENTALSUSTAINABILITYREALITYFANTASYFALLACY  MEBRATU 1998 493 520 D  NOURRY 2008 441 456 M  NEUMAYER 2003 E WEAKVERSUSSTRONGSUSTAINABILITYEXPLORINGLIMITSTWOOPPOSINGPARADIGMS  2001 ENVIRONMENTALSTRATEGYFORFIRSTDECADE21STCENTURY  PEARCE 1993 103 108 D  PEARCE 1989 D BLUEPRINTFORAGREENECONOMY  POPE 2004 595 616 J  ROBERTS 2004 J ENVIRONMENTALPOLICY  2020 SUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENTGOALSREPORT  SUTTON 2004 P  UNITEDNATIONS 1993 AGENDA21  1987 WORLDCOMMISSIONENVIRONMENTDEVELOPMENTREPORTCOMMONFUTURE  1987 COMMONFUTURE  2011 LIVINGRESOURCECONSERVATIONFORSUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENTWORLDCONSERVATIONSTRATEGY  CHAUDHERY 2018 M NANOTECHNOLOGYINENVIRONMENTALSCIENCE2OLUMES  1993 INTERNATIONALMONETARYFUND  NYMAN 2003 M SUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENTINDICATORSFORSWEDENCONCEPTSFRAMEWORKTECHNICALREPORTSTATISTICSSWEDEN  PIGOU 1952 A ESSAYSINECONOMICS  2013 SUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENTGOALSREPORT  UNITEDNATIONS 2015 TRANSFORMINGWORLD2030AGENDAFORSUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENT  2002 GLOBALLEADERSTOMORROWENVIRONMENTALTASKFORCE2002ENVIRONMENTALSUSTAINABILITYINDEX   HAJIANX2021X1 HAJIANX2021X1X24 HAJIANX2021X1XM HAJIANX2021X1X24XM    https://doi.org/10.15223/policy-017 https://doi.org/10.15223/policy-037 https://doi.org/10.15223/policy-012 https://doi.org/10.15223/policy-029 https://doi.org/10.15223/policy-004  item B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 B9780128243428000183 3-s2.0-B9780128243428000183 10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 780031 2021-06-25T02:42:41.259761Z 2021-01-01 2021-12-31 3-s2.0-B9780128243428000183-main.pdf https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/prod-ucs-content-store-eu-west/content/pii:B9780128243428000183/MAIN/application/pdf/5d8be0cc9b236c8e2be7f3b9775e752e/main.pdf main.pdf pdf true 200128 MAIN 24 3-s2.0-B9780128243428000183-main_1.png https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/prod-ucs-content-store-eu-west/content/pii:B9780128243428000183/PREVIEW/image/png/2f8b0b326ae8821b97a7d1d4f7287267/main_1.png main_1.png png 63269 849 656 IMAGE-WEB-PDF 1       B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3 978-0-12-824342-8 Elsevier Inc.  1 Evolution of the concept of sustainability. From Brundtland Report to sustainable development goals Mohammadhadi Hajian 1   Somayeh Jangchi Kashani 2   1 Department of Economics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran Department of Economics Tarbiat Modares University Tehran Iran  Economics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran  2 Department of Agriculture Development, Islamic Azad University, Sciences and Researches Branch, Tehran, Iran Department of Agriculture Development Islamic Azad University Sciences and Researches Branch Tehran Iran  PhD of Agriculture Development, Islamic Azad University, Sciences and Researches Branch, Tehran, Iran   The definition of sustainability has always been discussed by experts. In 1972, definitions stressed restrictions on ecological systems, carrying out functions such as absorption and recycling of waste of anthropogenic activities, with the concomitant problems of improving social, educational, health, and employment. In 1987, sustainable development was defined as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” In 2019, it was defined as satisfying the needs of current and future generations, depending on appropriate circumstances of human, natural, and economic capital to provide for human welfare. The concept of sustainable development has become a widely recognized goal for human society in the 21st century. The idea of sustainable development came to light in 1987 with the publication of “Our Common Future,” which firmly established sustainable development as a critical component of international development. Because inequalities that had been anomalies were increasing within and among nations, increasing poverty, especially in developing countries, depleting the ozone layer and causing global warming, depleting natural resources and endangering some species of animals and plants, and causing water and air pollution, and so forth, sustainable development came about as an effort to change the way of thinking about the planet. Behind this lies the reason for why the concept of development is now preferred instead of growth. Growth is believed to reflect only a quantitative aspect of countries without considering other qualitative items such as education, health, and equality. The argument is that growth is a quantitative increase in physical scale whereas development is qualitative improvement or the unfolding of potentialities. This research analyzes why and how the concept of sustainable development has emerged, how it should be conceptualized, and what should be done to achieve it. In addition, the idea of sustainable development was first thought to be a strategy to against ecological disaster resulting from the extreme commercial exploitation of sources and the deterioration of the environment. The main awareness was to maintain an exceptional environment. Today the idea has been extended. It is has first-rate economic and social complexity. The evaluation of financial techniques in many countries has proven that fast financial growth precipitated critical issues from the viewpoint of sustainable development consisting of social, economic and environmental sustainability.   Keywords Economic sustainability  Environmental sustainability  Social sustainability  Sustainable development  Sustainable development goals   1 Introduction The notion of sustainable development shaped the foundation of the Environment and Development Conference held by the United Nations (UN) in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. The conference manifest the first worldwide effort to design strategies and action plans to a form development that is environmentally friendly and more sustainable. Almost all countries of the world sent delegates to the conference, more than 100 of which were leaders of their countries. Besides the delegates of countries, some international organizations representing civil societies sent representatives to the summit. In 1987, in its report “Our Common Future” the Brundtland Commission stated that the key to solving environmental problems was sustainable development. The Brundtland Report considered the various serious problems regarding environmental degradation in previous decades: explicitly, that human activity had intense negative influences on the earth, and that development and growth would not be sustainable if the process of environment exploitation continued. Important tasks focusing this philosophy involved Rachel Carson's Silent Spring  (1962), Garret Hardin's Tragedy of the Commons  (1968), the ecologist magazine Blueprint for Survival  (1972), and the report of Club of Rome's The Limits to Growth  (1972). At the Conference of UN on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm in 1972, experts presented a unique recognition of sustainable development for the first time. Sustainable development was referred to as development that considers environment conservation especially for future generations. Fifteen years later, the term “sustainable development” was disseminated in the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, entitled “Our Common Future” which involved the classic definition of sustainable development: “the development which guarantees meeting the needs of the present generation without reducing the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” Nevertheless, it was not considered to be the main global problem until the main leaders of  the world identified sustainable development as the most important challenge of humanity. In 2002, 191 countries and international institutions attended the Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable Development, which had three important consequences: a political statement, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, and a variety of partnership creativities. The main promises made in the summit involved those sustainability in production and consumption, energy, and water.  2 The concept of sustainable development Sustainable development is a notion that at its center is groundbreaking, yet extremely hard to describe practically. The history behind sustainable development is not long. Pressures that may exist within the notion of sustainable development are various, extending from its unclear and imprecise description to the failure to reach a worldwide practical and functional context. The big problem the concept of sustainable development encounters is the needy to teach it to society and express it in words that individuals will understand. The definition of sustainable development is one that debatably is multifield, complicated, and regular; yet, describing the notion is undoubtedly an important challenge. The term “sustainable development” was invented in 1980, when the concept of the notion was purely rudimentary. It was at the World Conservation Strategy, an association between three leading environmental organizations the international union for conservation of nature (IUCN), world wide fund for nature (WWF), and the united nations environment programme (UNEP), where sustainable development was defined as “preserving the world's natural resources” (World Conservation Strategy, 2011 ). What the World Conservation Strategy had comprehended is that many countries increasingly exploit natural resources to achieve higher economic growth. The unique goal of the World Conservation Strategy was to ask countries to refuse to deplete natural resources because it was harming the environment. Therefore, sustainable development was considered only in general, not in detail, at the time it was invented; even after a decade, the definition remained almost the same. In 1987, the World Commission on Environment and Development published a paper entitled “Our Common Future” The article presented a commonly recited definition of sustainable development: development that guarantees meeting the needs of the current generation without reducing the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Many worldwide organizations, institutions, and nongovernmental organizations have since applied the paper, repeatedly identified as the Brundtland Report, that became the first manuscript to support sustainable development as a multidisciplinary field, because it clarified that the economy, society, and the environment were vital to sustainable development. In 1992, the UN Conference on Environment and Development planned a program named Agenda 21, which supposedly was the primary design for sustainability in the 21st century. The UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) observed countries that gave their agreement to Agenda 21. This commission is responsible for revising advancement in the enactment of Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. The commission also provides policy guidance for applying the Johannesburg Plan of  Implementation at the domestic, local, and worldwide levels. Both Agenda 21 and the Brundtland Report are broadly used bases for countries, institutions, and organizations in current times, yet a perfect description still is not evident even though they are acknowledged. The major problem with sustainable development is the lack of a perfect explanation of it. Although the Brundtland Report's definition is frequently used, one can see precisely where it fails. When looking again at the sentence defining sustainable development, two clear subjects come to mind. First, the definition of “needs” is not clear. There is a large difference between the needs of people living in an underdeveloped country and those of the residents of developed countries. Second, there is no type of time period in the definition, so “generations” is not clear. Because there are many undefined terms in the definition of sustainable development, it is hard to understand. An interesting way to look at subjects available with sustainable development is to observe the next quotation, which expresses a mixture of uncertainty about what to do and a sense of guilt about what is not being completed. In the other words, many individuals appear to be frightened to show what they feel is a lack of recognition of sustainable development. Thus, it is always easier to say that there is no need to talk about it. It is obvious that because of the ambiguous definition of sustainable development, governments and people seem to perform it differently. So far, for those who agree on a definition, the problem of application arises. Nations that have made a conscious attempt to recognize sustainable development and are eager to make some changes, both countrywide and worldwide, encounter the challenge of fulfilling policies linked to sustainable development. Agenda 21 is a document that provides a framework for sustainable development; however, there is no enforcement of the document. In the other words, nations may pretend that they know about sustainable development and agree to change their policies, but no one really puts them into action. As the Brundtland report stated, our failure to endorse public attention in sustainable development is often the result of overlooking economic and social fairness within and among countries, which demonstrates another important subject in sustainable development: something more than a simple definition of sustainable development. The difficulty with putting into action policies related to sustainable development is that countries that need them the most have no motive to observe the policies. Because a gap between developing and developed countries undoubtedly exists, developed countries principally are telling underdeveloped ones an appropriate way to develop. This evidently proper way of telling what underdeveloped countries should do has roots in the dominant nature of western countries, but is also focuses on common benefits between both developing and developed countries. At the institutional level, the interreliant targets of economic growth, social development, and environmental preservation are achieved by organizations that are inclined to be disjointed and independent. Sustainable development concentrates on the reputation of organizations that are ready to participate in economic, social, and environmental tasks at the levels of both decision-making and policy development. It is in the nature of sustainable development to outline the issues that not only a nation has with its own policies, but also the world has with its environmental problems.  Therefore, sustainable development is a notion that is groundbreaking yet imperfect within the scope of its perceiver. Sustainable development has the capacity to be a revolutionary notion that can transform the methods that countries apply on a countrywide level, and further so on a worldwide level. However, because of its multidisciplinary nature, desirable targets, and pliable clarifications, an obvious explanation of the notion has yet to be realized. Furthermore, its imprecise explanation and uncertainty further enhance the strains found within this concept, because any nation could express that it is obeying policies of sustainable development. The difficulty is first to present a succinct definition and then to be able to apply it to any country practically across the world. Because sustainable development can divide the dialogue between developed and developing countries, any nation should make the required changes to its own policies to offer a cleaner, harmless, and more effective environment, economy, and society. What sustainable development really demands is transparency and collaborative countries that are enthusiastic to work together to improve the world. Perhaps for this single reason, sustainable development is hard to explain, because each country has a different viewpoint of what a better world may be.  3 The definition of sustainable development Sustainable development is a notion that almost everyone has heard of but few recognize. That so many individuals are familiar with the concept of sustainable development is noteworthy considering that it was practically unidentified until the issue of the Brundtland Report by the World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) . Certainly, it was not until the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro and the worldwide extension of Agenda 21 of the UN that sustainable development became definitely founded as an acceptable policy goal (UN, 1993 ). Since that time, many governments have presented a variety of new policy criteria in an effort to direct their economies to a more sustainable path. This seems to be a positive trend. However, we should clarify upon which conditions we can call a country successful in taking steps to achieve the goals of sustainable development. Maybe we have concentrated too deeply on policy criteria and have neglected to focus on tools for attaining sustainable development with an appropriate range of measures to evaluate sustainable development performance in a country. Or perhaps we do not have appropriate sustainable development measures. Costanza (1987)  calls this situation a “social trap” because of a dependance on confusing signs or a failure to notice alarming signals exposed by currently developed measures.  4 The trend of sustainable development The notion of sustainable development has become an extensively known purpose for human civilization in the 21st century. The concept of sustainable development was  invented in 1987 with the publication of “Our Common Future,” which definitely recognized sustainable development as a vital section of global development. Because irregularities were causing inequalities within and among countries, growing poverty, especially in underdeveloped countries; depleting the ozone layer; causing global warming; depleting natural resources and endangering species of animals and plants; polluting water and air pollution, and so forth, sustainable development was proposed as an attempt to revolutionize the way of thinking about the globe. Behind this was the reason for why today the idea of development is favored instead of growth. Growth is alleged to reflect only a quantifiable feature of nations without considering some other qualitative items such as equality, health, and education.  5 The evolution of sustainable development concept The term “sustainable development” was used in 1980 by IUCN for the first time, yet the Brundtland Commission Report entitled “Our Common Future” made it important. The definition presented by the commission is still the most frequently used description across the globe. It describes sustainable development as that which meets the needs of the current generation without conciliating the needs of future generations (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987 ). According to Gro Harlen Brundtland, sustainability can be guaranteed only when it stresses (a) the mitigation of deprivation and poverty; (b) the protection and improvement of the resources base, which alone can guarantee the permanent alleviation of poverty; (c) expansion of the idea of development, so that it covers economic growth as well as cultural and social development; and (d) a consideration of both economics and ecology in making decisions at all levels (Pearce et al., 1989 ). The commission report emphasized considering policy-makers as well as organizers in both developed and developing countries. Environmental preservation institutes have been established in many countries and have the legal authority to inspect developmental plans on various sustainability scopes before approving or disapproving them. In 1992, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro was shown to be revolutionary in this way; a complex of 27 principles were assumed to lead nations in attaining sustainable development for both present and future generations. Besides recognition of the right and need of the current generation for development, it stressed its responsibility to protect the public environment to guarantee intragenerational and intergenerational equity. Since then, sustainable development as an issue has become popular across the world (Mebratu, 1998 ; Kori and Gondo, 2012 ). Sustainable development is a multidisciplinary subject with three main dimensions: social, economic, and environmental (Goodland and Daly, 1996 ). Social sustainability considers alleviating poverty; economic sustainability is related to the long-run sustainability of both renewable and nonrenewable resources so that they are put into the system of production and make long-run economic revenue; and environmental sustainability is linked to the protection and conservation of life forms existing on earth (Goodland, 1995 ; Sutton, 2004 ; Kori and Gondo, 2012 ). Sustainable  development has become a major question of discussion among environment specialists and economists (AtKisson, 2006 ; Ayres et al., 2001 ) and is widely evaluated in weak and strong terms. A weak definition of sustainability is based on neoclassical capital theory and economic value principles, and is human-centric in the natural environment. It investigates the capital value of natural resources but totally overlooks their value in terms of the natural goods and services it delivers. In addition, strong definitions of sustainability are based on biophysical principles and consider certain functions that the environment does for humans (Hediger, 2006 ; Nourry, 2008 ). For instance, a weak sustainability model may state that the value of a jungle is equal only to the total number of trees cut and the value it produces to make equipment or paper. Nevertheless, a strong sustainability index will evaluate the financial aids of a jungle not only in terms of the economic value of the trees but also according to its environmental and social value. Trees produce food and shelter for animals and humans, help them by its rainfall, act as carbon sinks, and provide fresh air, all of which are considered in the weak index. Therefore, weak sustainability indexes are based on the viewpoint that man-made capital is more important than natural capital, which can be replaced by its manmade counterpart. In contrast, a strong sustainability index allots importance to natural and also human capital in contrast to man-made capital. Strong sustainability indexes represent the tendency to regulate resource consumption to the use of advanced technologies, and conserves natural capital for future generations (Pearce and Atkinson, 1993 ; Neumayer, 2003 ; Roberts, 2004 ; Barr, 2008  as citied in Davies, 2013 ). Thus, weak and strong sustainability indices are different from each other in terms of morality and logical standpoints. Based on the strong sustainability concept model, the Brundtland Commission report recommended countries across the globe to pursue a development route calculated in terms of economic growth, but it also considered environmental and social features; therefore, all features should be measured and unified (Pope et al., 2004 ). Many governments pledged to take steps in sustainability in development by the early years of the third millennium. Agenda 21 at the Earth Summit in 1992, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (2002), and the CSD at its 11th (2003) and 13th (2005) meetings declared the need to develop and account for indicators that can describe sustainable development advancement by nations.  6 Indicator development Indicators use frameworks to offer a communal language and standpoint on the question and its answer. This simplifies indicator development, chiefly when several performers are playing their part. The method in which subjects are outlined becomes significant in the clarification and profounder studies of the consequences, because the frameworks have assumptions for rationales on which the indicator is founded and must be made available to those willing to understand the indicators. Comprehending these assumptions and frameworks is vital to compare and deliberate indicators from various institutes because they may be based on different frameworks. For most users,  nevertheless, presentation of the frameworks, or their classes, would only augment a needless degree of intricacy that may distract them from the outcomes. Institutes, working on sustainable development, must have a part in the policies of problem definition, responsive to matters of proper contribution and representation. Such institutes also should have their own role in science and technology, responsive to matters of quality control and expertise. Clark states that perhaps the most important message of the Johannesburg conference was that the research communities need to have a historic role in recognizing problems of sustainability with a larger tendency to link to other organizations in finding applied answers to those problems, and that institutes that spend most of their time doing pure science or pure politics are not expected to be as prosperous as those providing applied solutions that tend to be more effective than other organizations in generating information that can effect policy-making. The three measures of credibility, legitimacy, and salience are main features for depicting the effectiveness of sustainable development indicators in which credibility is related to the scientific and technical adequacy of the measurement system, legitimacy is related to the process of reasonable coping with the conflicting values and beliefs of stakeholders, and salience is related to the application of the indicator to decision-makers. The process of developing indicator guarantees at least the first two of these measures. Resources differ considerably between developing and developed countries. Socioeconomic, environmental, and knowledge contrasts between the two halves may be worsened by resource distribution. Finding ways to cover this resource gap is crucial for equitable representation, both geographically and in terms of identifying and bordering important subjects. Equitable representation raises the question of legitimacy and credibility of both the process and the final product. A capacity for activating and using science and technology is also a vital element of strategies endorsing sustainable development. Making scientific capacity and official support acceptable in developing countries is principally vital to improve resilience in regions that are vulnerable to numerous tensions arising from rapid, simultaneous changes in social and environmental systems. Nevertheless, scientific capacity alone is inadequate for the goals of creating reliable sustainable development indicators. Instead, building capacity is required, with stress on supporting the broader processes that certify legitimacy and credibility of the process of developing indicators. Effective capacity building stresses the main elements of communication, translation, and mediation. Preparing for sufficient communication between stakeholders is necessary, as is confirming that common understanding is possible. Communication is often stuck by misunderstanding, experience differences, and beliefs about the basis of a convincing discussion. Mediation additionally increases transparency of the process by considering all viewpoints, defining the laws of behavior and process, and founding the criteria of decision-making. An important pledge by institutes for managing the frontiers between expertise and decision making will help connect knowledge to action. Founding culpability to important actors across the frontier and using combined outputs to grow unity and pledge to the process are also useful in evolving capacity for sustainable development. Indicator legitimacy and acceptability depend on identifying the multiplicity of  legitimate standpoints. Where there are complicated subjects, the excellence of the process of decision-making is itself vital, and processes planned to encourage the discourse between stakeholders rather than weakening the authority of science are important to making a comprehensive base of consensus. The role of indicators is to serve as contributors to this discourse and decision-making process. The value of a special indicator set diverges between users and situations. Users should be able to have an impact on selecting the indicators they will have to use. Sometimes this regional selection will lead to a lack of comparability as various groups and processes elect to use various indicators. This can be suitable when the key goal of indicators is to advance effective decision-making. On the other hand, when the key goal is comparability, more emphasis should be given to standardization. It is not usually probable to have both.  7 Environmental sustainability The standard definition of sustainable development from Bruntland uses a three-pivot method to state, briefly, the connections among economic activity, quality of life, and the endlessness of ecosystems and natural resources. A society without operative life support systems cannot prosper; lack of supportive social constructions and institutes avoid economies from thriving. Furthermore, sustainable development has often been understood as social and economic development that should be sustainable from the environmental viewpoint as well. After the Bruntland definition was presented, it was gradually accepted that environmental sustainability has its own advantages. Goodland declares that environmental sustainability tends to advance human welfare by preserving the sources of raw materials used for human needs and guaranteeing that the volume of human waste will not be increased, to avoid damage to humans. This notion identifies that environmental sustainability worries about the insertion of restrictions on resource consumption, which is also a chief principle of the ecological economics framework of restrictions to growth. Moreover, Goodland describes environmental sustainability as the enforcement of constrictions on four key actions influencing the scale of the human economy: the use of renewable and nonrenewable resources on one side, and waste and pollution of resources on the other. Moldan, Janouskova, and Hak argue that the Organization of Monetary Cooperation and Development (OECD) similarly improves the idea of environmental sustainability within their environmental strategy for the first decade of the 21st century, published in 2001. The OECD's strategy defined four precise standards for environmental sustainability: (1) Regeneration: renewable assets will be used efficiently and their use should not be approved to exceed long-term quotes of natural regeneration. (2) Substitutability: nonrenewable resources will be used efficaciously and their use should be limited to ranges that may be offset through substitution with renewable assets or different sorts of capital. (3) Assimilation: release of unsafe or polluting materials into the environment should no longer exceed their waste assimilative capability. (4) The avoidance of irreversibility. The OECD used these four criteria for environmental  sustainability as a way to consider five interrelated targets for advancing environmental policies in a sustainable development context (OECD, 2001 ):(1) Preserving ecosystem integrity via the efficient management of natural resources  (2) Decoupling environmental pressures from economic growth  (3) Improving quality of life  (4) Improving international environmental connections by improving governance and cooperation  (5) Measuring progress, specifically using environmental indicators and indices    The concept of environmental sustainability can be further advanced through an ecosystem services viewpoint, because this reinforces the price referring to nonfinancial ecological features and capabilities, all of which can be vital for the OECD's five interrelated targets. Daily discusses “nature's services” to be produced from a worldwide life-assist structure (for example the climate system or hydrological cycle), items supplied via the geosphere (which includes mineral sources), and open space (inclusive of land on the surface of the earth, plus the distance above and beneath it). In meeting the OECD's five objectives for environmental sustainability, human welfare is preserved or enhanced. On this basis, ecosystem services can be considered a fundamental element of human welfare (Chaudhery et al., 2019 ). Therefore, environmental sustainability can be well defined as the preservation of nature's services at an appropriate level. This needs environmental services on a local, countrywide and global scale to be reserved in a healthy form, and by definition needs governance systems to have a responsibility of maintenance and supervisory effect on environmental infrastructure. To present an obvious and objective tool of assessing and representing a country's environmental sustainability, it is usually helpful to use environmental indicators and indices. No set of countrywide environmental indicators is similar to the standard set of measures used to measure economic performance. In economic policy, countries are normally compared according to their gross domestic product (GDP) and overall performance. In the environmental discipline, the most comprehensive set of indicators is integrated within the environmental performance index (EPI), which attempts but largely fails to provide an overarching description. The depiction, which captures the idea of environmental sustainability in preference to its specifics, consists of pollution, energy consumption, and soil degradation. A comparable loss of comprehensiveness can be found in sustainable development indicators, with the resulting effect that economic activities undertaken as sustainable development frequently threaten environmental integrity in a particular locality. Moreover, the subjective method of normalizing and weighting indicators of environmental sustainability is consistently vulnerable to an excessive degree of arbitrariness and a shortage of attention, shown in the consistency and meaningfulness of results, which lowers their relevance in phrases of policy practice. Theoretically, the use of environmental sustainability indices to delineate sustainable development is vital for explaining to policy-makers and whole society the relationships and exchanges among its three dimensions.  Although because of uncertainty, critics are skeptical about how well environmental indicators and composite indices represent environmental sustainability in practice, they can be beneficial instruments for evaluating the condition of the environment and observing trends over time, as well as describing conditions under which resource consumptions are sustainable. Assessments of sustainability, especially environmental sustainability, have four specifications: (1) subject recognition regarding the relations among human activity and nature; (2) orientation to the long term and an unsure future; (3) a normative foundation regarding the idea of justice between people of current and future generations as well as among humans and nature; and (4) concern for economic efficiency in the allocation of goods and services, in addition to their man-made substitutes and enhancements. Apprehending the full dynamics of environmental sustainability elements as elaborated in Refs and presenting them in terms of easily explicable quantity indicators is a difficult function. The United Nations (UN) declaires that environmental indices need to have four components as below:(1) Effects of economic activity on the environment (e.g., resource consumption, pollutant emissions, waste management)  (2) Impacts of resource productivity on the economic system (e.g., economic efficiency)  (3) Effects of environmental degradation on economic productivity (e.g., drop in absorptive ability, lack of forest cover)  (4) Impacts of environmental development on society (e.g., reduction of congestion costs, improvement in welfare and reduction of societal costs)    Regardless of obvious cohesions in the numerous definitions of environmental sustainability, there are no indicator sets or composite indices that satisfactorily and comprehensively measure the concept on a countrywide and global scale. Parris and Kates set out three reasons why this is the case: (1) the vague nature of sustainable development; (2) the variety of cause in characterization, and (3) measurement of sustainable development. Confusion regarding the terminology, appropriate facts, and strategies of measurement is another reason why environmenal indicators are not satisfactory. Therefore, the number of indicators and indices needed to quantify any country's environmental sustainability credentials does not permit a uniform, well-described procedure; for this reason, professional judgment is crucial. Several different international indices has been considered for assessment of environment such as the living planet index, satisfaction with life index, human development index (HDI) and sustainable society index which have been rejected because of some reasons as below:– Environmental sustainability index: a composite index assessing 21 factors of environmental sustainability; however, in 2005 it was replaced through the more comprehensive EPI.  – Barometer of sustainability: includes all three sustainable development dimensions, but the restricted scope of the environmental component and lack of an approach, proposing approaches for achieving targets, rendered the EPI a more comprehensive instrument for evaluation.   – Surplus biocapacity index: this index lists nations according to the balance or deficit among their ecological footprint (EF) and countrywide biocapacity. Although the surplus or deficit in biocapacity is a critical criterion for evaluation and is considered, a global rating list gives nothing further in phrases of analytical value.  – Satisfaction with life index: measures subjective welfare across countries in compare to wealth, health, and accessto basic education. On the basis that it fails to comprise any type of ecological focus, the happy planet index (HPI) is more desirable.  – Human development index: although it is a comprehensive socioeconomic metric widely linked to the gratification with life index, it lacks attention to environmental problems and thus was not favored for the chosen indices.- Living planet index: concentrates especially on the problem of biodiversity stocks and in an international context; as a result, it misses enough scope to evaluate environmental sustainability troubles in a countrywide context.       7.1 Social sustainability Social sustainability is the least determined and least apprehended of the various methods of achieving sustainability and sustainable development. Social sustainability has had significantly less interest in public discourse than economic and environmental sustainability. There are numerous procedures for sustainability. The primary, which postulates a trio of environmental sustainability, economic sustainability, and social sustainability, is the most broadly accepted as a model for addressing sustainability. The idea of “social sustainability” in this method includes subjects such as social equity, livability, health equity, community development, social capital, social support, human rights, labor rights, place-making, social responsibility, social justice, cultural competence, community resilience, and human adaptation. A second, newer one is the method suggesting that all fields of sustainability are social, consisting of ecological, economic, political, and cultural sustainability. Those fields of social sustainability are based on the connection between the social and the natural, with the ecological field defined as human embeddedness in the environment. In these items, social sustainability includes all human activities (Atkinson et al., 2003 ). It is not just relevant to the focused intersection of economics, the environment, and the social.  7.2 Economic sustainable development Starting from the 21st century, increases in GDP are no longer considered the main macroeconomic indicator and the economic growth is not the major purpose of the economic system. Since the second world war, the concentration on economic development policy has changed through different paradigms up to the idea of sustainable development. The Keynesian concept of the postwar 1970s, in which economic policy was built on sturdy governmental interventions, to the monetarist thought of the 1980s, when initiatives were taken to reduce social disparities by including deprived groups into the mainstream economic system. In the late 1980s to 1990s, the emphasis of  economic development policy shifted to a rationalist concept and projects to enhance the environmental and total quality of life with absorbing particularly talented individuals and enterprises started. The simple standards of the UN specify sustainable development to be considered as the principal goal of the economic system from the current point of view. Economic growth calculated by increase in GDP represents a rise in economic activity and correlates with well-being. Rapid economic growth is rarely sustainable. There are some countries, particularly developing countries, in which excessive discrepancy exists between the level of economic activity and the people's well-being: precisely, high growth with low development. Development is broader than economic growth. Well-being cannot be best measured with financial phrases. Economic growth is an external notion, whereas development is a broader inner one that includes an enhancement in the standards of living and poverty reduction. Economic growth may also bring about an enhancement in the standards of living related to a small share of the population whereas most people are yet poor. It is the distribution of economic growth among the population as an index determining the level of economic development. Economic growth is measured through the growth of GDP, whereas economic development is an extra complex procedure that needs a couple of indicators. The analysis of economic procedures in many nations indicates that fast economic growth has precipitated extreme issues from the point of view of sustainable development, such as social and local inequality, lack of adequate infrastructure and rural environment, lack of national capital, and many others. Sustainable development is an instant enhancement in well-being for all populations, not compromising the well-being within the near of far future. Economic growth is essential, but it is not enough for development.  7.3 Context of sustainable development goals Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were emerged at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro in 2012. The aim was supplying a set of global goals that met urgent environmental, political, and economic problems encountering our world. The SDGs update the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which commenced a worldwide attempt in 2000 to challenge the indignity of poverty. The MDGs created measurable, universally agreed-upon targets for tackling excessive poverty and starvation, preventing lethal sicknesses, and expanding primary schooling to all young people, among other development priorities. For 15 years, the MDGs led development in several important regions: decreasing poverty, providing accees to water and sanitation, lowering infant mortality, and considerably enhancing maternal health. In addition, they began worldwide movement for free primary education, inspiring nations to invest for future generations. Most significantly, the MDGs made massive strides in combatting HIV/AIDS and other treatable diseases, including malaria and tuberculosis.   7.4 Key Millennium Development Goal achievements More than one billion people have been lifted out of extreme poverty (since 1990):• Child mortality dropped by more than half (since 1990)  • The number of youth who were out of college dropped by more than half (compared with 1990)  • HIV/AIDS infections fell by nearly 40% (compared with 2000)    The legacy and achievements of the MDGs offer us precious lessons and new goals. However, for tens of millions of humans, the job remains unfinished. We want to take steps towards ending hunger, attaining full gender equality, enhancing health services, and getting all children into education higher than primary level. The SDGs are also pressing to shift the sector onto a greater sustainable path. The SDGs are an ambitious attempt to finish what we commenced and address a number of pressing demanding situations. All 17 goals interconnect, so accomplishment in one area affects success in others. Coping with the danger of climate change affects how we manage our fragile natural sources, achieving gender equality or better health facilitates, getting rid of poverty, and fostering peace and inclusive societies will lessen inequalities and help economies prosper. In brief, this is the finest field we should improve in life for future generations. The SDGs was concurrent with another historic agreement reached in 2015 at the COP21 Paris climate change conference. Together with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, signed in March 2015 in Japan, these agreements provide a collection of common standards and attainable aims to lessen carbon emissions, manage the risks of climate change and natural disasters, and to build back better after a catastrophe. The SDGs are unique in that they cover subjects that have an effect on us all. They reaffirm our worldwide dedication to cease poverty permanently, anywhere. They are formidable in making sure nobody is left back. More importantly, they include all of us in building a more sustainable, safer, and more wealthy planet.   8 Sustainable development goals 8.1 Goal 1. End poverty everywhere in all of its forms Through 2030, eliminate severe poverty for all of us anywhere, currently measured as humans livelihood on less than $5 a day. By 2030, reduce by at the least half the proportion of men, women, and children living in poverty in all its dimensions, in regard to national definitions, and enforce nationally suitable social protection structures and measures for all. By 2030, reach considerable coverage of vulnerable and poor people, assuring that everyone, specifically vulnerable and poor people, have the same rights to economic resources, in addition to access to elementary services, possession and control over land and different kinds of property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new technology, and economic services, such as microfinance by 2030,  construct the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable conditions and decrease their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related severe events and different financial, social and environmental shocks and failures (Sustainable Development Goals Report, 2020 ).  8.2 Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture By 2030, eradicate hunger and ensure the right of access to resources for all people, mainly the poor and people in vulnerable conditions, including newborns, to safe, nutritious, and enough food year-round by 2030. Cease all types of malnutrition. The world has agreed to targets for improving the life qulaity of children under age 5 years, and to address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women, and older people by 2025. Moreover, it is agreed to double the productivity in agriculture sector and earning of small-scale food producers, specifically women, aboriginal peoples, family farmers, herders and fishers, including through safe and identical access to land, other efficient resources and inputs, education, monetary services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-agriculture employment by 2030. Make sure sustainable food production structures and put in force resilient farming tasks that grow productiveness and production, that help preserve ecosystems, that enhance ability for variation to climate change, extreme climate, drought, flooding and different catastrophes and that step by step enhance land and soil quality.  8.3 Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote welfare for all people By 2030, reduce the worldwide maternal mortality ratio to less than seven in ten thousand live births. By 2030, eradicate avoidable deaths of infants and kids under age 5 years, with all international locations aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to less than 12 in 1000 live births and under-5 mortality to less than 25 in 1000 live births. By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and out-left tropical diseases and fight hepatitis, water-borne illnesses and different communicable sicknesses. By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases thru prevention and remedy and promote intellectual health and well-being. Empower the prevention and remedy of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and dangerous use of alcohol. By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and damages from road accidents. By 2030, ensure global access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and training, and the incorporation of reproductive health into countrywide strategies and programs. Obtain global health coverage, such as financial risk protection, access to high-quality vital health-care services and access to safe, effective and low-cost critical drug treatments and vaccines for all.   8.4 Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all By 2030, ensure that any girl and boy have access to free, and equitable primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effectivelearning outcomes. By 2030, ensure that early childhood improvement, care and pre-primary education are available for any child so that they get prepared for primary education. By 2030, ensure equal availability for all women and men to cheap and satisfactory technical, vocational, and tertiary education. By 2030, notably increase the number of children and adults who've relevant abilities, along with technical and vocational skills, for employment, respectable jobs and entrepreneurship. By 2030, readicate gender disparities in education, and make sure equal access to all stages of training and vocational education for the vulnerable people, such as individuals with disabilities, aboriginal peoples and youngsters in vulnerable situations. By 2030, make sure that all young people, and a substantial share of adults, each males and females, attain literacy and numeracy.  8.5 Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls Eradicate all kinds of discrimination against all women anywhere. Eradicate all kinds of violence against girls and women in public and personal fields, including trafficking and sexual and other kinds of exploitation. remove all harmful tasks, which include child marriage and female genital mutilation. Recognize and value unpaid care and homework through the availability of public services, infrastructure, and social safety regulations and promoting of shared responsibility within the family as nationally suitable. Ensure women's complete and powerful participation and identical opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life. Make certain common availability of sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in accordance with the Program of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development.  8.6 Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all By 2030, ensure common and equitable access to safe and low-priced potable water, gurantee access to proper and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and quit open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and those in vulnerable situations. By 2030, enhance water quality through reducing pollutants, removing of dumping and minimizing release of risky chemical compounds and materials, halving the share of untreated wastewater and significantly developing recycling and safe reuse globally. By 2030, significantly increase water-use efficiency for all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to cope with water scarcity and noticeably reduce the number of people affected by water scarcity. By 2030, enforce integrated water resource management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate.   8.7 Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all By 2030, gurantee access to low-priced, reliable and modern energy services. By 2030, increase significantly the share of renewable energy in the global energy combination. By 2030, double the worldwide rate of improvement in electricity efficiency. By 2030, improve worldwide cooperation to facilitate access to clean power research and technology, which include renewable power, increase efficiency and purify fossil-fuel technologies, and encourage investment in electricity infrastructure and clean energy technology. By 2030, promote infrastructure and upgrade production for imparting modern and sustainable technologies for all developing countries, particularly least developed countries, and land-locked developing countries, in accordance with their respective programs of support.  8.8 Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all Make economic growth sustainable according to country conditions, especially at least seven percent annual growth of gross domestic product (GDP) in under-developed countries. Achieve higher levels of economic growth through diversification, technological upgrading and innovation, involving via an emphasis on high added value and labor-intensive sectors. Enhance development-orientated policies that assist productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and inspire the formalization and increase of micro-, small- and medium-sized firms, including thru access to economic services. Enhance gradually, through 2030, worldwide efficient resource performance in consumption and production and endeavor to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10–year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production, with developed countries taking the lead. By 2030, gain full and effective employment and decent job for all males and females, including for young persons and also people with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value.  8.9 Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation Expand reliable, sustainable, and strong infrastructure, involving local and transboundary infrastructure, to aid economic development and human welfare, with a concentration on cheap and equitable availability for all people. Improve inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, extensively boost industry's proportion of employment and gross domestic product (GDP), in line with country's circumstances, and double its proportion in under-developed countries. Promote the access of small-scale businesses and industries, mainly in developing countries, to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets. By 2030, improve infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable,  and more efficient and lead them to extra adoption of environmental-friendly technologies and industrial processes, with all countries acting based on their respective skills. Enhance scientific research, promote the technological abilities of enterprises in all countries, specifically developing countries. Ensure halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and appreciably growing recycling and safe reuse globally by 2030. Significantly increase water-use efficiency throughout all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to deal with water shortage and appreciably lessen the number of humans affected by water shortage by 2030. Implement incorporated water resource management in any regions, including via transboundary cooperation as appropriate.  8.10 Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries By 2030, steadily gain and maintain income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population at a rate higher than the national average. By 2030, strengthen and improve the social, economic and political inclusion of all, no matter age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or financial or different reputations. Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, involving through abolishing discriminatory laws, regulations and tasks and developing appropriate regulations and movement towards this regard. Enact policies, in particular financial, salary and social protection rules, and steadily achieve greater equality, Enhance the legislation and observation of the world financial markets and institutions and empower the fulfillment of such policies. Ensure greater illustration and louder voice for developing countries in making decisions in worldwide monetary and economic institutions in order to deliver extra powerful, credible, accountable and legally-valid establishments. Facilitate orderly, secure, well-organized and answerable migration and mobility of humans, including through fulfillment of planned and properly-managed migration policies. Enforce the principle of special and differential treatment for developing countries.  8.11 Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable By 2030, ensure for all people the availability of adequate, secure, and low-cost housing and essential services and improve the life quality of people living in slums. By 2030, provide access to secure, cheap, approachable, and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road security, significantly by growing public transport, with specific attention to the needs of those in vulnerable conditions, women, children, disabled persons, and elders. By 2030, improve inclusive and sustainable urbanization and ability for participatory, united and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries. Fortify attempts to guard and protect the global cultural and natural legacy. By 2030, noticeably lessen the rate of deaths and number of people affected and considerably reduce the direct economic losses relative to international gross domestic product (GDP) resulting from catastrophes, including water-related calamities, with an emphasis on supporting the poor and vulnerable people.   8.12 Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns Execute the 10–year framework of programs on sustainable consumption and manufacturing, all nations undertake, with developed countries taking the lead, considering the development and capacities of developing countries. By 2030, attain the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources. By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and decrease food losses along production and supply chains, which includes postharvest losses. By 2020, attain the environmentally sound control of chemical fertilizers and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed global frameworks, and appreciably lessen their release to air, water, and soil to minimize their destructive impacts on human health and the environment.  8.13 Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts Increase resilience and adaptive ability to climate-related dangers and natural disasters in all countries. Merge climate change measures into local policies, tactics and planning. Expand education, and knowledge and improve human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, impact reduction and early caution. Put in force the dedication commenced with the aid of parties of developed countries to the UN Framework Convention on climate change to meet the needs of developing countries inside the context of significant mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and absolutely operationalize the Green Climate Fund via its capitalization as soon as possible. Promote mechanisms for raising potential for effective planning and management, related to climate change, in under-developed countries, including concentrating on women, youth, and local and marginalized groups.  8.14 Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development By 2025, avoid and extensively diminish all types of marine pollution, specially from land-based activities, such as marine debris and nutrient pollutants through 2020, sustainably control and guard marine and coastal ecosystems to prevent extensive detrimental impacts, via increasing their resilience, and acting for their renovation to achieve healthy and efficient oceans. Restrict and address the influences of ocean acidification, including via more advantageous clinical cooperation in any level. By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and cease overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and negative fishing practices and put in force technological know-how-based management plans, to be able to restore fish stocks inside the shortest time possible, at least to volumes that could produce most sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics.   8.15 Goal 15. Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation, and halt biodiversity loss By 2020, gurantee preservation, renovation and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, specifically forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with commitments under global agreements. By 2020, proceed the fulfillment of sustainable management of all kinds of jungles, prevent deforestation, restore degraded jungles and drastically boom afforestation and reforestation internationally. By 2030, fight desertification, renovate degraded land and soil, alongside land influenced by desertification, drought and floods, and try to acquire a land degradation-independent globe. By 2030, ensure the preservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, on the way to improve their potential to make profits that are important for sustainable development. Take urgent and extraordinary actions to lessen the degradation of natural habitats, stop the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, avoid the extinction of threatened species, Develop equitable sharing of the benefits of the utilization of genetic assets and increase suitable access to such sources, as the world over agreed. Take instant and substantial action to avoid poaching and trafficking of blanketed species of flora and fauna and cope with both supply and demand of illicit trade of wildlife.  8.16 Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels Meaningfully lessen all sorts of violence and related death rates anywhere. Eradicate abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children. Enact the rule of law at countrywide and worldwide levels and ensure equal access to justice for all. By 2030, notably decrease smuggling flows, reinforce the restoration and return of stolen belongings and fight all forms of organized crimes. Significantly lessen corruption and bribery in all their kinds. Expand powerful, responsible and transparent institutions at all levels. Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making in any level. Develop and fortify the participation of developing countries in the institutions of world governance. By 2030, provide legal identity for all, such as birth registration. Ensure public access to information and defend basic freedoms, in accordance with national law and international agreements. Develop applicable national establishments, consisting of through international cooperation, for constructing ability in any level, mainly in developing countries, to barricade violence and combat terrorism and crime. Develop and put in force nondiscriminatory laws and guidelines for sustainable development.   8.17 Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 8.17.1 Finance Improve national resource mobilization, which includes global aid to developing countries, to improve domestic ability for tax and different income collection. Developed countries to fulfill completely their legitimate development assistance commitments, which includes the dedication by many advanced economies to catch the target of 0.7 percent of official development assistance/gross national income (ODA/GNI) to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 percent of ODA/GNI to under-developed countries; ODA providers are advocated to remember setting a target to provide as a minimum 0.20 percent of ODA/GNI to least developed countries. Mobilize extra financial sources for developing countries from different sources. Aid developing countries in accomplishing long-run debt sustainability via coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as suitable, and cope with the foreign debt of rather indebted low-income countries to reduce debt distress. Assume and perform investment promotion regimes for least developed countries.  8.17.2 Technology Improve cooperation among developed and developing countries and triangular regional and worldwide collaborations on for accessing to technology, knowledge, and innovation and collaborate information sharing via mutually agreed terms, consisting advanced coordination among current mechanisms, especially on the UN level, and thru a global mechanism of technology facilitation. Improve the development, transfer, dissemination, and diffusion of environmental-friendly technologies to under-developed countries on beneficial terms, which include on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed. Completely operationalize banks for technology, make mechanisms for science and innovation for under-developed countries. By 2017 improve the usage of empowering technology, specifically information and communications technology (ICT).  8.17.3 Capacity-building Improve worldwide aid for fulfilling effective and targeted capacity-building in developing countries to assist countrywide plans to put into effect all of the sustainable development goals, which includes via cooperations of developing and developed countries in regional and international levels and also intra developing countries as well.  8.17.4 Trade Develop a global, law-based, open, nondiscriminatory, and equitable multilateral trading framework under the World Trade Organization (WTO), consisting through  the outcomes of negotiations under Doha Development Agenda. Remarkably the exports of developing countries, especially so that it will double the under-developed countries' share of world exports by 2020. Recognize the long-term fulfillment of duty-free and quota-free market access on a permanent basis for all under-developed countries, consistent with the decisions of WTO, including through ensuring that preferential policies of origin applicable to imports from least-developed countries are transparent and simple, and contribute to facilitating marketplace access.  8.17.5 Systemic issues Expand worldwide macroeconomic stability, such as through policy coordination and policy coherence. Develop policy coherence for sustainable development. REgard every country's policy space and management to set up and enforce rules for poverty eradication and sustainable development. Develop the worldwide partnership for sustainable development, complemented thru the usage of multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilize and share the knowledge, skills, technology and financial resources, to assist the accomplishment of the sustainable development goals in all countries, mainly developing countries. Inspire and improve effective public, public-private, and civil society partnerships, constructing at the practice and resourcing strategies of partnerships.   8.18 Sustainable development goals and targets 2030 According to an inclusive process of inter-governmental discussions, and based on the proposal of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the agreed-upon goals are described. The SDGs and objectives are incorporated and inseparatable, worldwide in nature, and universally appropriate, considering various national realities, capacities, and levels of development and respecting countrywide regulations and priorities. Targets are described as ambitious and worldwide, with every government placing its own countrywide targets directed by the global level of ambition but thinking of countrywide circumstances. Each government may even determine how those ambitious and worldwide purposes ought to be included in national plans, tactics, policies, and strategies. It is crucial to understand the connection between sustainable development and other relevant ongoing tactics within the economic, social, and environmental fields. In determining these desires and goals, we realize that every country encounters special demanding situations to achieve sustainable development, and we underestimate the special difficulties fronting the vulnerable countries, especially African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, and small island developing states, as well as particular difficulties fronting middle-income countries. Countries in conditions of battle also require specific attention. We realize that baseline data for numerous targets are unavailable, and we require increased aid for strengthening data collection and capacity building in Member States (Sustainable Development Goals Report, 2020 ).    9 Conclusions Sustainable development notion was primarily believed to be a resolution for ecological disaster arised from vast industrial exploitation of resources and deterioration of the environment and the initiative concentration was to maintain environmental quality. Nowadays, the idea of sustainable development has extended by considering quality of life in its intricacy, environmentally, economically and socially. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were emerged at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro in 2012. The aim was supplying a set of global goals that met urgent environmental, political, and economic problems encountering our world. Sustainability has three main dimensions: economic, social and environmental aspects. The analysis of economic progression in many countries has indicated that the rapid economic growth led to severe difficulties from the viewpoint of sustainable development. It is the distribution of economic growth among the population as an index determining the level of economic development. Economic growth is measured through the growth of GDP, whereas economic development is an extra complex procedure that needs a couple of indicators. Economics is defined as the science of allocation of scarce resources to satisfy the unrestricted needs of the people of a given society so there is the need about new directions for economic policy if sustainable development is to be achieved including: difference between developing and developed countries, and justice in the international economy, and participatory development. Sustainable development is a continuous improvement of welfare for all people, without reducing the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. So, in order to satisfy the idea of sustainable development, it should be studied the best possible use of all available economic resources for producing maximum feasible output of goods and services that are required for the society now and in the future and the fair distribution of this output. Although economic sustainability is very important, it is essential to consider environmental and social sustainability as well. It is crucial to understand the connection between sustainable development and other relevant ongoing tactics within the economic, social, and environmental fields. Nowadays, the idea is extended in its intricacy, environmentally, economically and socially. The evaluation of the economic sustainability in many countries has proven that economic growth, without considering other aspects of development, precipitated critical issues from the point of view of sustainable development consisting of social, and environmental sustainability. The standard definition of sustainable development from Bruntland uses a three-pivot method to state, briefly, the connections among economic activity, quality of life, and the endlessness of ecosystems and natural resources. A society without operative life support systems cannot prosper; lack of supportive social constructions and institutes avoid economies from thriving. Furthermore, sustainable development has often been understood as social and economic development that should be sustainable from the environmental viewpoint as well. Environmental sustainability tends to improve human welfare by preserving the sources used for human needs and guaranteeing that the volume of human waste will not be increased, to avoid damage to  humans. This notion identifies that environmental sustainability worries about the insertion of restrictions on resource consumption, which is also a chief principle of the ecological economics framework of restrictions to growth. Social sustainability is the least determined and least apprehended of the various methods of achieving sustainability and sustainable development. Social sustainability has had significantly less interest in public discourse than economic and environmental sustainability. There are numerous procedures for sustainability. The primary, which postulates a trio of environmental sustainability, economic sustainability, and social sustainability, is the most broadly accepted as a model for addressing sustainability. The idea of “social sustainability” in this method includes subjects such as social equity, livability, health equity, community development, social capital, social support, human rights, labor rights, place-making, social responsibility, social justice, cultural competence, community resilience, and human adaptation. A second, newer one is the method suggesting that all fields of sustainability are social, consisting of ecological, economic, political, and cultural sustainability. Those fields of social sustainability are based on the connection between the social and the natural, with the ecological field defined as human embeddedness in the environment. In these items, social sustainability includes all human activities. It is not just relevant to the focused intersection of economics, the environment, and the social.   References Ayres et al., 2001 R. Ayres  J. Van den Berrgh  J. Gowdy   Strong versus weak sustainability: economics, natural sciences, and consilience   Environ. Ethics  23  2 2001  155 168    Ayres, R., Van den Berrgh, J., Gowdy, J. (2001). Strong versus weak sustainability: economics, natural sciences, and consilience. Environ. Ethics 23 (2), 155-168.  Atkinson et al., 2003 T. Atkinson    Social Indicators: The EU and Social Inclusion   2003 Oxford University Press Oxford     Atkinson T. et al. (2003). Social Indicators: the EU and Social Inclusion. Oxford University Press, Oxford.  AtKisson, 2006 A. AtKisson   Sustainability is dead – long live sustainability   M. Keiner   The Future of Sustainability  2006 Springer Dordrecht: Netherlands   231 243    AtKisson, A. (2006). Sustainability is Dead - Long Live Sustainability, In: Keiner, M. (Ed.), The Future of Sustainability, Springer, Dordrecht: Netherlands, pp. 231-243.  Barr, 2008 S. Barr   Environment and Society Sustainability Ashgate, Policy and the Citizen   2008   Aldershot  Barr, S. (2008). Environment and Society Sustainability Ashgate, Policy and the Citizen,Aldershot.  Costanza, 1987 R. Costanza   Social traps and environmental policy   Bioscience  37  6 1987  407 412    Costanza, R. (1987). Social traps and environmental policy. Bioscience, 37 (6), 407-412.  Chaudhery et al., 2019 M. Chaudhery  H. Ajay  K. Mi   Modern Environmental Analysis Techniques for Pollutants   2019   www.elsevier.com/books/modern-environmental-analysis-techniques-for-pollutants    Chaudhery M, H Ajay, K Mi. (2019). Modern Environmental Analysis Techniques for Pollutants. www.elsevier.com/books/modern-environmental-analysis-techniques-for-pollutants  Davies, 2013 G.R. Davies   Appraising weak and strong sustainability. Searching for a middle ground   Consilience  10  2013  111 124    Davies, G.R.( 2013). Appraising weak and strong sustainability. Searching for a middle ground. Consilience 10, 111-124  Goodland, 1995 R. Goodland   The concept of environmental sustainability   Annu. Rev. Ecol. Systemat.  26  1 1995  1 24    Goodland, R. (1995). The concept of environmental sustainability. Annu. Rev, Ecol,Syst, 26 (1), 1-24  Goodland and Daly, 1996 R. Goodland  H. Daly   Environmental sustainability: universal and non‐negotiable   Ecol. Appl.  6  4 1996  1002 1017    Goodland, R., Daly, H., 1996. Environmental sustainability: universal and non‐negotiable. Ecol. Appl. 6 (4), 1002–1017.  Hediger, 2006 W. Hediger   Weak and strong sustainability. environmental conservation and economic growth   Nat. Resour. Model.  19  3 2006  359 394    Hediger, W. (2006). Weak and strong sustainability. environmental conservation and economic growth. Nat. Resour. Model. 19 (3), 359-394  Kori and Gondo, 2012 E. Kori  T. Gondo   Environmental sustainability. Reality fantasy or fallacy?   2nd International Conference on Environment and Bioscience. IPCBEE  vol. 44   2012 IACSIT Press Singapore   10.7763/IPCBEE.2012.V44.22   Kori, E., Gondo, T.( 2012). Environmental Sustainability. Reality Fantasy or Fallacy? 2ndInternational Conference on Environment and Bioscience. IPCBEE vol. 44, IACSIT Press, Singapore, DOI: 10.7763/IPCBEE.2012.V44.22  Mebratu, 1998 D. Mebratu   Sustainability and sustainable development: historical and conceptual review   Environ. Impact Assess. Rev.  18  6 1998  493 520    Mebratu, D. (1998). Sustainability and sustainable development: historical and conceptual review. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev, 18 (6), 493-520  Nourry, 2008 M. Nourry   Measuring sustainable development: some empirical evidence for France from eight alternative indicators   Ecol. Econ.  67  2008  441 456    Nourry, M. (2008). Measuring sustainable development: some empirical evidence for France from eight alternative indicators. Ecol. Econ. 67, 441-456.  Neumayer, 2003 E. Neumayer   Weak versus Strong Sustainability: Exploring the Limits of Two Opposing Paradigms   2003 Edward Elgar Publishing     Neumayer, E. (2003. ). Weak Versus Strong Sustainability: Exploring the Limits of Two Opposing Paradigms. Edward Elgar Publishing.  OECD, 2001 OECD  Environmental Strategy for the First Decade of the 21st Century   2001 OECD Paris     OECD. (2001).environmental strategy for the first decade of the 21st century. Paris: OECD.  Pearce and Atkinson, 1993 D. Pearce  G. Atkinson   Capital theory and the measurement of sustainable development: an indicator of “weak” sustainability   Ecological  8  2 1993  103 108    Pearce, D., Atkinson, G., 1993. Capital theory and the measurement of sustainable development: an indicator of “weak” sustainability. Ecological 8 (2), 103–108.  Pearce et al., 1989 D.W. Pearce  A. Markandya  E.B. Barbier   Blueprint for a Green Economy   1989 Earthscan London, UK     Pearce, D.W., Markandya, A., Barbier, E.B. (1989). Blueprint for a Green Economy Earthscan. London, UK.  Pope et al., 2004 J. Pope  D. Annandale  A. Morrison-Saunders   Conceptualising sustainability assessment   Environ. Impact Assess. Rev.  24  6 2004  595 616    Pope, J., Annandale, D., Morrison-Saunders, A. (2004). Conceptualising sustainability assessment. Environ Impact Assess. Rev. 24 (6), 595-616.  Roberts, 2004 J.A. Roberts   Environmental Policy   2004 Routledge London     Roberts, J.A.( 2004). Environmental Policy. Routledge, London.  Sustainable Development Goals Report, 2020 Sustainable Development Goals Report  2020   www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/progress-report/    Sustainable Development Goals Report. (2020). www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/progress-report/  Sutton, 2004 P. Sutton   A perspective on environmental sustainability   Paper Vic. Commission. Environmen. Sustain.  1–32  2004    Sutton, P. (2004). A perspective on environmental sustainability.Paper on the Victorian Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, 1-32.  United Nations, 1993 United Nations   Agenda 21   1993   (New York, UN)  United Nations. (1993). Agenda 21. New York, UN.  WCED, 1987 WCED  World Commission on Environment and Development. Report Our Common Future   1987 United Nations New York    https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/5987our-common-future.pdf    WCED. (1987). reportWorld Commission on Environment and Development. Report Our Common Future. United Nations, New York. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/5987our-common-future.pdf  World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), 1987 World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED)  Our Common Future   1987 Oxford University Press Oxford     World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED). (1987). Our Common Future. Oxford, Oxford University Press.  World Conservation Strategy, 2011 World Conservation Strategy  Living Resource Conservation for Sustainable Development, World Conservation Strategy   2011   URL http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/WCS-004.pdf    World Conservation Strategy.(2011). Living Resource Conservation for Sustainable Development, World Conservation Strategy. URL: http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/WCS-004.pdf,    Further reading Chaudhery et al., 2018 M. Chaudhery  H. Ajay  K. Mi   Nanotechnology in Environmental Science, 2 Olumes   2018 978-3-527-34294-5    Chaudhery M, H Ajay, K Mi. (2018). Nanotechnology in Environmental Science, 2 olumes, ISBN: 978-3-527-34294-5  Commission of the European Communities, Eurostat, 1993 Commission of the European Communities, Eurostat  International Monetary Fund   1993 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. United Nations and World BankNew York Paris, Washington DC     Commission of the European Communities, Eurostat. (1993). International Monetary Fund. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. United Nations and World BankNew York. Paris, Washington DC.  Nyman, 2003 M. Nyman   Sustainable Development Indicators for Sweden. Concepts and Framework, Technical Report, Statistics Sweden   2003   http://www.scb.se/eng/omscb/eu/eu.asp    Nyman M. (2003). reportSustainable Development Indicators for Sweden. Concepts and Framework, Technical Report, Statistics Sweden. http://www.scb.se/eng/omscb/eu/eu.asp  Pigou, 1952 A.C. Pigou   Essays in Economics   1952 London: Macmillan & Co. Ltd London     Pigou, A.C. (1952). Essays in Economics. London: Macmillan & Co. Ltd.: London  Sustainable Development Goals Report, 2013 Sustainable Development Goals Report  2013   www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/progress-report/    Sustainable Development Goals Report. (2013). www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/progress-report/  United Nations, 2015 United Nations   Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development   2015    United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  World Economic Forum, 2002 World Economic Forum  Global Leaders of Tomorrow Environmental Task Force: 2002 Environmental Sustainability Index   2002   http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/indicators/ESI    World Economic Forum .(2002). Global Leaders of Tomorrow Environmental Task Force: 2002 Environmental sustainability index http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/indicators/ESI         